---
title: "Promoting Breast Cancer Equity Across States"
excerpt: "Identified mammography facility coverage gaps with linear regression and choropleth maps."
categories:
  - projects
date: 2023-01-27
---

Project for the 2023 [Rice Datathon](https://rice-datathon-2023.devpost.com/), where I was on a team with Michael Menezes, Brandon Huang, and Henry Pu; we won the Best Visualization prize. Our task was to analyze a dataset of locations of FDA-certified mammography facilities and determine how to most effectively expand mammogram access. First, we used [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) to clean the given 2010-2019 U.S. census dataset and generate female population estimates for each state, stratified by age, and then we used the National Cancer Institute's external incidence rate dataset to calculate the expected future number of breast cancer diagnoses in each state. Next, we trained a linear regression model on the expected number of cancer patients compared to the number of mammography facilities in each state (which we found again by cleaning the given dataset), allowing us to visually identify the states with the least coverage as those furthest from the best-fit line.

However, we noticed that this approach was flawed since states like Florida with significantly higher-than-average populations were being compared to all 49 other states in the linear regression fitting. This was problematic because states with large populations tend to have dense urban centers, so a single mammography facility in one of those cities could serve much more people than perhaps a facility in a more rural area, i.e. coverage gaps could not be determined so simply. To remedy this, we decided to to take a more nuanced approach instead with [folium](https://python-visualization.github.io/folium/latest/)-generated heat maps, where each state's opacity was based on their patient-to-facility ratio and could then be considered separately for analysis.

For more details, see our [Devpost](https://devpost.com/software/choropleth-maps-of-cancer-density-per-hospital-in-each-state) submission.